The following is a conversation with Elon Musk, part two. The second time we spoke on the podcast
with parallels, if not in quality, than an outfit to the objectively speaking greatest
sequel of all time, Godfather part two. As many people know, Elon Musk is a leader of Tesla,
SpaceX, Neolink, and the Boren company. What may be less known is that he's a world class
engineer and designer, constantly emphasizing first principles thinking and taking on big
engineering problems that many before him will consider impossible. As scientists and engineers,
most of us don't question the way things are done, we simply follow the momentum of the crowd.
But revolutionary ideas that change the world on the small and large scales happen
when you return to the fundamentals and ask, is there a better way? This conversation focuses
on the incredible engineering and innovation done in brain computer interfaces at Neolink.
This work promises to help treat neurobiological diseases to help us further understand the
connection between the individual neuron to the high level function of the human brain.
And finally, to one day expand the capacity of the brain through two way communication
with computational devices, the internet, and artificial intelligence systems.
This is the Artificial Intelligence Podcast. If you enjoy it, subscribe by new YouTube,
Apple Podcasts, Spotify, support on Patreon, or simply connect with me on Twitter,
Alex Friedman, spelled F R I D M A N. And now, as an anonymous YouTube commenter,
refer to our previous conversation as the quote, historical first video of two robots
conversing without supervision. Here's the second time, the second conversation with Elon Musk.
Let's start with an easy question about consciousness. In your view, is consciousness
something that's unique to humans, or is it something that permeates all matter,
almost like a fundamental force of physics? I don't think consciousness permeates all matter.
Panpsychists believe that. Yeah. There's a philosophical. How would you tell?
That's true. That's a good point. I believe in scientific methods. I don't
bother mine or anything, but the scientific method is like, if you cannot test the hypothesis,
then you cannot reach meaningful conclusion that it is true. Do you think consciousness,
understanding consciousness is within the reach of science of the scientific method?
We can dramatically improve our understanding of consciousness. I would be hard pressed to
say that we understand anything with complete accuracy, but can we dramatically improve our
understanding of consciousness? I believe the answer is yes.
Does an AI system, in your view, have to have consciousness in order to achieve human level
or superhuman level intelligence? Does it need to have some of these human qualities,
that consciousness, maybe a body, maybe a fear of mortality, capacity to love,
those kinds of silly human things?
It's different. There's this scientific method, which I very much believe in,
where something is true to the degree that it is, testably so.
Otherwise, you're really just talking about preferences or untestable beliefs or that kind
of thing. It ends up being somewhat of a semantic question, where we are conflating
a lot of things with the word intelligence. If we parse them out and say,
all we headed towards the future where an AI will be able to outthink us in every way,
then the answer is unequivocally yes.
In order for an AI system that needs to outthink us in every way, it also needs to have
a capacity to have consciousness, self awareness, and understanding.
It will be self aware, yes. That's different from consciousness.
I mean, to me, in terms of what consciousness feels like, it feels like consciousness is in
a different dimension. But this could be just an illusion. If you damage your brain in some way,
physically, you get, you damage your consciousness, which implies that consciousness is a physical
phenomenon, in my view. The things that I think are really quite likely is that digital
intelligence will outthink us in every way, and it will soon be able to simulate what we consider
consciousness. So to a degree that you would not be able to tell the difference.
And from the aspect of the scientific method, it might as well be consciousness if we can
simulate it perfectly. If you can't tell the difference, and this is sort of the Turing test,
but think of a more sort of advanced version of the Turing test. If you're talking to
digital superintelligence and can't tell if that is a computer or a human, like let's say you're
just having a conversation over a phone or a video conference or something where you think
you're talking, looks like a person makes all of the right inflections and movements and all the
small subtleties that constitute a human and talks like human makes mistakes like a human.
And you literally just can't tell. Are you video conferencing with a person or an AI?
Might as well. Might as well. Be human. So on a darker topic, you've expressed serious concern
about existential threats of AI. It's perhaps one of the greatest challenges our civilization faces.
But since I would say we're kind of an optimistic descendants of apes, perhaps we can find several
paths of escaping the harm of AI. So if I can give you three options, maybe you can comment,
which do you think is the most promising? So one is scaling up efforts on AI safety and
beneficial AI research in hope of finding an algorithmic or maybe a policy solution.
Two is becoming a multi planetary species as quickly as possible. And three is merging with AI
and riding the wave of that increasing intelligence as it continuously improves.
What do you think is the most promising, most interesting as a civilization that we should
invest in? I think there's a lot of investment going on in AI. Where there's a lack of investment
is in AI safety. And there should be, in my view, a government agency that oversees
anything related to AI to confirm that it does not represent a public safety risk,
just as there is a regulatory authority for the food and drug administration,
there's NHTSA for automotive safety, there's the FAA for aircraft safety.
We generally come to the conclusion that it is important to have a government referee or
referee that is serving the public interest in ensuring that things are safe when there's a
potential danger to the public. I would argue that AI is unequivocally something that has
potential to be dangerous to the public and therefore should have a regulatory agency just as
other things that are dangerous to the public have a regulatory agency. But let me tell you a
problem with this is that the government moves very slowly and the rate of the rate, the usually
way a regulatory agency comes into being is that something terrible happens. There's a huge public
outcry and years after that, there's a regulatory agency or a rule put in place. It takes something
like seat belts. It was known for a decade or more that seat belts would have a massive impact on
safety and save so many lives and serious injuries. The car industry fought the requirement to put
seat belts in tooth and nail. That's crazy. Hundreds of thousands of people probably died
because of that. They said people wouldn't buy cars if they had seat belts, which is obviously
absurd. Or look at the tobacco industry and how long they fought any thing about smoking.
That's part of why I helped make that movie, Thank You for Smoking. You can sort of see just
how pernicious it can be when you have these companies effectively
achieve regulatory capture of government is bad. People in the AI community refer to the advent of
digital superintelligence as a singularity. That is not to say that it is good or bad,
but that it is very difficult to predict what will happen after that point. There's some
probability it will be bad, some probably it will be good. We obviously want to affect that
probability and have it be more good than bad. Well, let me on the merger with AI question and
the incredible work that's being done at Neuralink. There's a lot of fascinating innovation here
across different disciplines going on. The flexible wires, the robotic sewing machine,
the responsive brain movement, everything around ensuring safety and so on. We currently
understand very little about the human brain. Do you also hope that the work at Neuralink will
help us understand more about the human mind, about the brain? Yeah, I think the work at Neuralink
will definitely shut a lot of insight into how the brain and the mind works. Right now,
just the data we have regarding how the brain works is very limited. We've got fMRI, which
is that that's kind of like putting a stethoscope on the outside of a factory wall and then putting
it like all over the factory wall and you can sort of hear the sounds, but you don't know what
the machines are doing really. It's hard. You can infer a few things, but it's a very broad
breaststroke. In order to really know what's going on in the brain, you really need, you have to have
high precision sensors and then you want to have stimulus and response. Like if you trigger Neuralink,
how do you feel? What do you see? How does it change your perception of the world?
You're speaking to physically just getting close to the brain, being able to measure signals from
the brain will give us sort of open the door inside the factory. Yes, exactly. Being able to
have high precision sensors that tell you what individual neurons are doing and then being
able to trigger Neuron and see what the response is in the brain so you can see the consequences of
if you fire this Neuron, what happens? How do you feel? What does it change? It'll be really
profound to have this in people because people can articulate their change. Like if there's a
change in mood or if they can tell you if they can see better or hear better or
be able to form sentences better or worse or their memories are jogged or that kind of thing.
So on the human side, there's this incredible general malleability,
plasticity of the human brain. The human brain adapts, adjusts and so on. So that's not that
plastic for totally frank. So there's a firm structure but there is some plasticity and the
open question is sort of if I could ask a broad question is how much that plasticity can be
utilized? Sort of on the human side, there's some plasticity in the human brain and on the machine
side, we have neural networks, machine learning, artificial intelligence that's able to adjust
and figure out signals. So there's a mysterious language that we don't perfectly understand
that's within the human brain and then we're trying to understand that language to communicate
both directions. So the brain is adjusting a little bit, we don't know how much and the
machine is adjusting. Where do you see as they try to sort of reach together almost like with an
alien species, try to find a protocol, communication protocol that works? Where do you see the biggest
the biggest benefit arriving from on the machine side or the human side? Do you see both of them
working together? I should think the machine side is far more malleable than the biological side
by a huge amount. So it will be the the machine that adapts to the brain. That's the only thing
that's possible. The brain can't adapt that well to the machine. You can't have neurons start to
regard an electrode as another neuron because a neuron just this is like the pulse and so
something else is pulsing. So there is that elasticity in the interface which we believe
is something that can happen but the vast majority of malleability will have to be on the machine
side. But it's interesting when you look at that synaptic plasticity at the interface side, there
might be like an emergent plasticity because it's a whole nother. It's not like in the brain. It's a
whole nother extension of the brain. You know, we might have to redefine what it means to be
malleable for the brain. So maybe the brain is able to adjust to external interfaces.
There will be some adjustments to the brain because there's going to be something
reading and simulating the brain and so it will adjust to that thing. But
most the vast majority of the adjustment will be on the machine side.
This is just it has to be that otherwise it will not work. Ultimately, like we currently
operate on two layers. We have sort of a limbic like prime primitive brain layer,
which is where all of our kind of impulses are coming from. It's sort of like we've got
we've got like a monkey brain with a computer stuck on it. That's the human brain. And a lot
of our impulses and everything are driven by the monkey brain. And the computer, the cortex,
is constantly trying to make the monkey brain happy. It's not the cortex that's steering the
monkey brain. It's the monkey brain steering the cortex. But the cortex is the part that tells
the story of the whole thing. So we convince ourselves it's more interesting than just the
monkey brain. The cortex is like what we call like human intelligence, you know, so it's like
that's like the advanced computer relative to other creatures. Other creatures do not have
either really, they don't have the computer, or they have a very weak computer relative to humans.
But but it's this, it's like, it sort of seems like surely the really smart thing should control
the dumb thing. But actually, the dumb thing controls the smart thing. So do you think some
of the same kind of machine learning methods, or whether that's natural language processing
applications are going to be applied for the communication between the machine and the brain
to learn how to do certain things like movement of the body, how to process visual stimuli and so
on. Do you see the value of using machine learning to understand the language of the two way
communication with the brain? Yeah, absolutely. I mean, we're neural net. And that, you know,
AI is basically neural net. So it's like digital neural net will interface with biological neural
net. And hopefully bring us along for the ride. Yeah. But the vast majority of our
of our intelligence will be digital. This is like, so like think of like the difference in
intelligence between your cortex and your limbic system is gigantic. Your limbic system really
has no comprehension of what the hell the cortex is doing. It's just literally hungry, you know,
or tired or angry or sexy or something, you know, and just and then in that case, that's
that impulse to the cortex and tells the cortex to go satisfy that. Then a lot of great deal of
like a massive amount of thinking, like truly stupendous amount of thinking has gone into sex
without purpose, without procreation, without procreation, which, which is actually quite
a silly action in the absence of procreation. It's a bit silly. Well, why are you doing it?
Because it makes the limbic system happy. That's why that's why. But it's pretty absurd, really.
Well, the whole of existence is pretty absurd in some kind of sense.
Yeah. But I mean, this is a lot of computation has gone into how can I do more of that
with procreation, not even being a factor. This is, I think, a very important era of research by NSFW.
Any agency that should receive a lot of funding, especially after this conversation?
If I propose a formation of a new agency. Oh, boy.
What is the most exciting or some of the most exciting things that you see in the future impact
of Neuralink, both in the science, the engineering and societal broad impact?
So Neuralink, I think, at first will solve a lot of brain related diseases. So
creating from like autism, schizophrenia, memory loss, like everyone experiences memory loss at
certain points in age. Parents can't remember their kid's names and that kind of thing.
So there's a tremendous amount of good that Neuralink can do in solving critical
damage to brain or the spinal cord. There's a lot that can be done to improve quality of life
of individuals. And that will be those will be steps along the way. And then ultimately,
it's intended to address the the risk, the existential risk associated with
digital superintelligence. Like we will not be able to be smarter than a digital supercomputer.
So therefore, if you cannot beat them, join them. And at least we won't have that option.
So you have hope that Neuralink will be able to be a kind of connection to allow us to
merge to ride the wave of the improving AI systems.
I think the chance is above zero percent.
So it's non zero. There's a chance. And that's
So what if you've seen Dumb and Dumber?
Yes.
So I'm saying there's a chance.
He's saying one in a billion or one in a million, whatever it was at Dumb and Dumber.
You know, it went from maybe one in a million to improving. Maybe it'll be one in a thousand
and then one in a hundred, then one in ten. Depends on the rate of improvement of Neuralink
and how fast we're able to do to make progress, you know.
Well, I've talked to a few folks here that are quite brilliant engineers. So I'm excited.
Yeah. I think it's like fundamentally good, you know,
you're giving somebody back full motor control after they've had a spinal cord injury,
you know, restoring brain functionality after a stroke, solving,
debilitating genetically orange brain diseases. These are all incredibly great, I think.
And in order to do these, you have to be able to interface with neurons at detail level and
need to be able to fire the right neurons, read the right neurons, and then effectively you can
create a circuit, replace what's broken with silicon, and essentially fill in the missing
functionality. And then over time, we can develop a tertiary layer. So if like the limbic system
is the primary layer, then the cortex is like the second layer. And as I said, you know,
obviously the cortex is vastly more intelligent than the limbic system. But people generally
like the fact that they have a limbic system and a cortex. I haven't met anyone who wants to
delete either one of them. They're like, okay, I'll keep them both. That's cool.
The limbic system is kind of fun.
Yeah, that's what the fun is. Absolutely. And then people generally don't want to lose the
cortex either, right? So they're like having the cortex and the limbic system.
And then there's a tertiary layer, which will be digital superintelligence.
And I think there's room for optimism given that the cortex is very intelligent and the limbic
system is not. And yet they work together well. Perhaps there can be a tertiary layer
where digital superintelligence lies. And that will be vastly more intelligent than the cortex,
but still coexist peacefully and in a benign manner with the cortex and limbic system.
That's a super exciting future, both in the low level engineering that I saw as being done here
and the actual possibility in the next few decades.
It's important that New Orleans solve this problem sooner rather than later, because
the point at which we have digital superintelligence, that's when we pass singularity.
And things become just very uncertain. It doesn't mean that they're necessarily bad or good.
But the point at which we pass singularity, things become extremely unstable.
So we want to have a human brain interface before the singularity, or at least not long after it,
to minimize existential risk for humanity and consciousness as we know it.
But there's a lot of fascinating, actual engineering, low level problems here at New
Orleans that are quite exciting. The problems that we face in New Orleans are
material science, electrical engineering, software, mechanical engineering, micro fabrication.
It's a bunch of engineering disciplines, essentially. That's what it comes down to,
is you have to have a tiny electrode. It's so small it doesn't hurt neurons,
but it's got to last for as long as a person. So it's got to last for decades.
And then you've got to take that signal, you've got to process that signal locally at low power.
So we need a lot of chip design engineers, because we've got to do signal processing.
And do so in a very power efficient way, so that we don't heat your brain up,
because the brain's very heat sensitive. And then we've got to take those signals,
we've got to do something with them, and then we've got to stimulate the back to,
so you could biirectional communication. So if somebody's good at material science,
software, mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, chip design, micro fabrication,
that's what those are the things we need to work on. We need to be good at material science,
so that we can have tiny electrodes that last a long time. And it's a tough thing with the
material science problem, it's a tough one, because you're trying to read and stimulate
electrically in an electrically active area. Your brain is very electrically active and
electrochemically active. So how do you have, say, a coating on the electrode that doesn't dissolve
over time, and is safe in the brain? This is a very hard problem. And then how do you
collect those signals in a way that is most efficient, because you really just have very
tiny amounts of power to process those signals. And then we need to automate the whole thing,
so it's like Lasik. If this is done by neurosurgeons, there's no way it can scale to
a large number of people. And it needs to scale to a large number of people, because I think
ultimately we want the future to be determined by a large number of humans.
Do you think that this has a chance to revolutionize surgery period, so neurosurgery and surgery
all across? Yeah, for sure. It's got to be like Lasik. If Lasik had to be hand done,
done by hand, by a person, that wouldn't be great. It's done by a robot. And the ophthalmologist
kind of just needs to make sure your head's in my position, and then they just press the button and go.
So smart summon and soon auto park takes on the full beautiful mess of parking lots and their
human to human nonverbal communication. I think it has actually the potential to have a profound
impact in changing how our civilization looks at AI and robotics, because this is the first time
human beings, people that don't own a Tesla may have never seen a Tesla, heard about a Tesla,
get to watch hundreds of thousands of cars without a driver. Do you see it this way almost like an
education tool for the world about AI? Do you feel the burden of that, the excitement of that,
or do you just think it's a smart parking feature? I do think you are getting at something
important, which is most people have never really seen a robot. And what is the car that is autonomous?
It's a four wheeled robot. Yeah, it communicates a certain sort of message with everything from
safety to the possibility of what AI could bring to its current limitations, its current challenges,
it's what's possible. Do you feel the burden of that almost like a communicator, educator to the
world about AI? We're just really trying to make people's lives easier with autonomy.
But now that you mention it, I think it will be an eye opener to people about robotics,
because most people have never seen a robot, and there are hundreds of thousands of Teslas,
won't be long before there's a million of them that have autonomous capability
and the drive without a person in it. And you can see the kind of evolution of the car's
personality and thinking with each iteration of autopilot. You can see it's uncertain about this,
or it gets, but now it's more certain. Now it's moving in a slightly different way.
Like I can tell immediately if a car is on Tesla Autopilot, because it's got just little nuances
of movement, it just moves in a slightly different way. Cars on Tesla Autopilot,
for example, on the highway are far more precise about being in the center of the lane
than a person. If you drive down the highway and look at where cars are, the human driven cars,
are within their lane, they're like bumper cars. They're like moving all over the place.
The car on autopilot, dead center. Yeah, so the incredible work that's going into that
neural network is learning fast. Autonomy is still very, very hard. We don't actually know
how hard it is fully, of course. You look at most problems you tackle, this one included
with an exponential lens. But even with an exponential improvement, things can take longer
than expected sometimes. So where does Tesla currently stand on its quest for full autonomy?
What's your sense? When can we see successful deployment of full autonomy?
Well, on the highway already, the probability of intervention is extremely low. So for highway
autonomy, with the latest release, especially the probability of needing to intervene
is really quite low. In fact, I'd say for stop and go traffic, it's as far safer than a person
right now. The probability of an injury or an impact is much, much lower for autopilot than a
person. And then with navigating autopilot, it can change lanes, take highway interchanges,
and then we're coming at it from the other direction, which is low speed, full autonomy.
And in a way, this is like, it's like, how does a person learn to drive? You learn to drive in
the parking lot. You know, the first time you learn to drive probably wasn't jumping on
Marcus Street in San Francisco. That'd be crazy. You learn to drive in the parking lot, get things
right at low speed. And then the missing piece that we're working on is traffic lights and
stop streets. Stop streets, I would say, are actually also relatively easy because you kind
of know where the stop street is, worst case in geocoders, and then use visualization to see
where the line is and stop at the line to eliminate the GPS error. So actually, I'd say
there's probably complex traffic lights and very windy roads are the two things that need to get
solved. What's harder, perception or control for these problems? So being able to perfectly
perceive everything or figuring out a plan once you perceive everything, how to interact with
all the agents in the environment, in your sense, from a learning perspective, is perception or
action harder? And that giant, beautiful multitask learning neural network? The hottest thing is
having accurate representation of the physical objects in vector space. So taking the visual
input, primarily visual input, some sonar and radar, and then creating an accurate vector
space representation of the objects around you. Once you have an accurate vector space representation,
the plan and control is relatively easier. Basically, once you have accurate vector space
representation, then you're kind of like a video game. Cars in like Grand Theft Auto or something,
they work pretty well. They drive down the road, they don't crash pretty much unless you crash
into them. That's because they've got an accurate vector space representation of where the cars
are, and then they're rendering that as the output. Do you have a sense high level that Tesla's on
track on being able to achieve full autonomy? So on the highway? Yeah, absolutely. And still no
driver state, driver sensing. And we have driver sensing with the torque on the wheel? That's right.
By the way, just a quick comment on karaoke. Most people think it's fun, but I also think it is
a driving feature. I've been saying for a long time, singing in the car is really good for
attention management and vigilance management. That's great. Tesla karaoke is great. It's one
of the most fun features of the car. Do you think of a connection between fun and safety sometimes?
Yeah, you can do both at the same time. That's great. I just met with Andrew and wife of Carl
Sagan, the director of Cosmos. I'm generally a big fan of Carl Sagan. He's super cool and had
a great way of doing things. All of our consciousness, all civilization, everything we've ever known
and done is on this tiny blue dot. People also get, they get too trapped in there. This is like
squabbles amongst humans. Let's not think of the big picture. They take a civilization
and our continued existence for granted. I shouldn't do that. Look at the history of civilizations.
They rise and they fall. And now civilization is all, it's globalized. And so civilization,
I think now rises and falls together. There's not geographic isolation. This is a big risk.
Things don't always go up. That should be, that's an important lesson of history.
In 1990, at the request of Carl Sagan, the Voyage 1 spacecraft, which is a spacecraft that's
reaching out farther than anything human made into space, turned around to take a picture of Earth
from 3.7 billion miles away. And as you're talking about the pale blue dot, that picture,
the Earth takes up less than a single pixel in that image. Yes.
Of course. Appearing as a tiny blue dot as pale blue dot as Carl Sagan called it.
So he spoke about this dot of ours in 1994. And if you could humor me, I was wondering if
in the last two minutes you could read the words that he wrote describing this pale blue dot.
Sure. Yes, it's funny, the universe appears to be 13.8 billion years old. Earth is like 4.5
billion years old. Another half billion years or so, the sun will expand and probably evaporate
the oceans and make life impossible on Earth. Which means that if it had taken consciousness
10% longer to evolve, it would never have evolved at all. It's just 10% longer.
And I wonder how many dead one planet civilizations that are out there in the cosmos
that never made it to the other planet and ultimately extinguished themselves or were
destroyed by external factors. Probably a few. It's only just possible to travel to Mars,
just barely. If G was 10% more, wouldn't work, really.
If FG was 10% lower, it would be easy.
Like you can go single stage from surface of Mars all the way to surface of the Earth.
Because Mars is 37% Earth's gravity.
We need a giant booster to get off Earth.
Look again at that dot. That's here. That's home. That's us. On it, everyone you love,
everyone you know, everyone you've ever heard of, every human being who ever was, lived out their
lives. The aggregate of our joy and suffering, thousands of confident religions, ideologies,
and economic doctrines. Every hunter and farger, every hero and coward, every creator and destroyer
of civilization. Every king and peasant, every young couple in love, every mother and father,
hopeful child, inventor and explorer. Every teacher of morals, every corrupt politician,
every superstar, every supreme leader, every saint and sinner in the history of our species
live there, on a mode of dust suspended in a sunbeam. Our planet is a lonely speck in the great
enveloping cosmic dark. In our obscurity, in all this vastness, there is no hint that help will
come from elsewhere to save us from ourselves. The Earth is the only world known so far to
harbor life. There is nowhere else, at least in the near future, to which our species could migrate.
This is not true. This is false. Mars. And I think Carl Sagan would agree with that. He
couldn't even imagine it at that time. So thank you for making the world dream.
And thank you for talking today. I really appreciate it. Thank you.